---
title: "Development of a Deformable Microfluidic Chip to Replicate Tissue Strains In Situ"
collection: talks
type: "Podium Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2021-06-14
venue: "Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering, and Biotransport Conference"
date: 2021-06-14
location: "Virtual"
---

Cells respond to mechanical and biochemical stimuli to maintain homeostasis, and changes in the magnitude or type of stimuli can lead to various diseases. For example, the heart and lung tissue stiffen over time potentially leading to cardiovascular disease and lung fibrosis, respectively. In this study, we focus on back and spine pathologies that affect ~8 million people in the United States, costing over $100 Billion annually. The most identifiable and widely studied source of back pain is due to degeneration or failure of the intervertebral disc. Disc degeneration, stemming from disruption of the annulus fibrosus (AF), leads to increased pain and reduced mobility. To enable regenerative medicine strategies, a better understanding of AF cell mechanobiology during tissue development is needed. A method is needed to quantitatively and reliably replicate intradisc loading to test potential mitigators at the cellular and nascent tissue levels. Advancements in microfluidics have enabled micromechanical testing of small cohorts of  cells. However, a chip that emulates more physiological strains observed in the AF is needed. Therefore, we present a deformable chip that emulates the AF’s cyclical and multiaxial strains. We demonstrate a method to evaluate the effects of these strains on the initiation and propagation of AF tissue degradation. We bolster development of the chip by using the Finite Element Method (FEM) to validate laboratory measurements and examine strains within a cell monolayer.
